# Jekyll

{% raw %}

Jekyll is a static site genrator. It converts markdown files into static website. Used as alternative of wordpress or cms.

Jekyll is better than any cms like wordpress. because it generates static sites from markdown and reduce the complexity of mantaining server/database/security with less resources usage.

Github pages also uses jekyll

official docs [here](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/) and Tutorial Video's [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLAZ4kZ9dFpOPV5C5Ay0pHaa0RJFhcmcB)

## Installation for Ubuntu

Installing Dependencies and ruby

```bash
sudo apt install ruby-full build-essential zlib1g-dev   # Dependencies
```

Adding Environment Variables in `~/.bashrc` file to configure ruby

```bash
echo '# Install Ruby Gems to ~/gems' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export GEM_HOME="$HOME/gems"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export PATH="$HOME/gems/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

Installing Jekyll and Bundler

```bash
gem install jekyll bundler
```

## Setup

Creating project and starting server

```bash
jekyll new my-project-name  # Creating a new jekyll project

cd my-project-name

bundle exec jekyll serve	# Build site and Start jekyll server for first time
jekyll serve	# builds site and start jekyll server

jekyll build	# Bulid site
```

Directory structure

```bash
.
├── _posts		# Stores all posts markdown files
└── _site		# Final static version of site
└── _config.yml	  # Configration of your data
├── about.markdown	# Default about us page
├── index.markdown	# Default home page
├── Gemfile		# gem packages details file

```

## Liquid

It is a templating language which has three main components

- objects - output variables template, use `{{` and `}}` for example `{{ page.title }}`

- tags - logic control template, use `{%` and `%}` for example

  ```html
  {% if page.show_sidebar %}
  <div class="sidebar">sidebar content</div>
  {% endif %}
  ```

- filters - it changes the output of liquid object. use `|`. For example: `{{ "h1" | capitalize }}`

### Escaping Liquid from file

If your post or any file include liquid syntax then jekyll may display / return error and to resolve that we can use `{% word %}` with value as`raw` to start ignoring and `endraw` to stop ignoring.

```js
{% #raw %}	# Remove `#` from raw
{% #endraw %}	# Remove `#` from endraw
```

_we are using jekyll liquid `raw` and `endraw` to escape liquid error / rendering from this file, thats why we used # before endraw_

## Front Matter

It is the information about our blog post. It can be written in yaml, or json.

it is used in the head of file for example

```yaml
---
my_number: 5
---
{ { my_number } }
```

## Writing Posts

`_posts` folder includes all the posts.

naming convention - `year-month-date-blog-name.markdown`

To create new post just create file with naming convention inside `_posts/` or `_posts/dir/`.

For Example:

```yaml
# Inside _posts/some_dir/
---
layout: post
---
Some Other Post
```

## Draft Posts

Create `_drafts` folder to store draft posts

create them like new post and **can skip date in name only till it is draft**

```bash
# To render draft in server
jekyll serve --draft
```

## Creating Pages

Creating page is simple, just create `page-name.md` file or `folder/page-name.md` file inside folder and use `layout: page`

`permalink` is optional by default it will use file path from root folder.

## Permalink

default permalink of post is `/:categories/:year/:month/:day/:title` and we can change it by adding `permalink: "/path/"` in front matter of post / post

## Default Front Matter

We can set default front matter in `_config.yml` file.

```yaml
# Syntax of defining default value

defaults:
  - scope:
      path:
    values:
      # values
```

For example setting default value for all posts

```yaml
# Inside _config.yml

defaults:
  - scope:
      path:
      type: posts
    values:
      layout: post
      parmalink: "/:categories/:title/"
```

**Make sure to re-run jekyll server after editing config.yml file**

```bash
jekyll serve
```

## Themes

By default jekyll uses `minima` theme.

We can search for themes [jekyllthemes.io](http://jekyllthemes.io) or [github repos](https://github.com/topics/jekyll-theme) or [rubygem](https://rubygems.org/search?page=5&query=jekyll+theme)

For demo i will use [jekyll-theme-chirpy](https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/)

To install any theme please check official docs of theme first

Basic steps:

1. Add theme name in `GemFile`. for example: `gem "jekyll-theme-chirpy"`
2. Install theme by command `bundle install` in terminal
3. Update theme in `_config.yml` file. for example: `theme: jekyll-theme-chirpy`
4. Update layout as per theme

## Layouts

We can Create layouts in `_layouts` folder in root directory folder and create a new file `default.html` or `post.html` or `anyname.html`

by default html file inside `_layouts` can attributes like `page.title` or `content` or any attribute of page

```html
<!-- Inside _layouts/anyname.html -->
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <title>{{ page.title }}</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    {{ content }}
  </body>
</html>
```

Now we can call layout from any file in front matter just by calling `layout: layout-file-name-without-html`

## Variables

Variables are used to retrive or store data. Official Doc [here](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/variables/)

We can create variables in [front matter](#front-matter) and call them as [Liquid](#liquid)

Global Variables:

- content - Returns Content of `post or page`
- layout.param - returns param value from `layout` front matter
- page.param - returns param value from `post / post` front matter
- site.param - returns param value from `_config.yml` file

- paginator (check [docs](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/variables/)) - only if `paginate` configruration option is set, then accessable and for details check [docs](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/variables/)

For Example created a post layout:

```html
---
author: "JD"
---

<h1>This is a post</h1>
<hr />

<p>author: {{ layout.author }}</p>
<p>title: {{ page.title }}</p>

{{ content }}
```

## Includes

Includes is used to import other layouts.

To use include we need to create `_includes` folder in root directory and inside that we have to create `file.html` and it can do all function as layout.html file like front matter, calling variable with liquid

To call file, syntax used is `{% include file.html param1=value1 param2=value2 %} `

for example created `_includes/demo-header.html` and calling demo-header from post layout:

```html
<!-- demo-header.html file -->
<h1 style="color: {{ include.color }};">Site Title: {{ site.title }}</h1>
<hr />
<br />
```

```html
<h1>{% include demo-header.html color="blue"%}</h1>

<h1>This is a post</h1>
<hr />

<p>title: {{ page.title }}</p>

{{ content }}
```

## Looping Through Posts

We can loop thorough any array by call `{% for item in items %}` and ending it with `{% endfor %}`

for example looping through posts and pages in home layout file:

Inside `_layouts/home.html`

```yaml
{% for post in site.posts %}
  <a href="{{ post.url }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
  <br>
{% endfor %}

{% for post in site.pages %}
  <a href="{{ post.url }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
  <br>
{% endfor %}
```

## Conditions

if condition can be called with `{% if condition %}`,
elseif condition with `{% elsif condition %}`,
else with `{% else %}`
and end with `{% endif %}`

for example calling page if `page.title` exist or `page.title == "demo"` inside `_layouts/home.html`

```yml
{% for post in site.pages %}

  {% if post.title %}
    <a href="{{ post.url }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
    <br>

  {% elsif post.title == "demo" %}
    <a href="{{ post.url }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
    <br>

  {% endif %}

{% endfor %}
```

## Data Files

Data files are used to retreive data. they support yaml, json file.

Inside `_data` folder we create data files.

For example created `_data/people.json` file to get all people details and call them in home page:

```json
[
  {
    "id": 1,
    "name": "name1"
  },
  {
    "id": 2,
    "name": "name2"
  },
  {
    "id": 3,
    "name": "name3"
  }
]
```

Calling data in `home` page layout

```html
<p>All people: {{ site.data.people }}</p>

{% for people in site.data.people %}
<p>People {{ people.id }}: {{ people.name }}</p>
{% endfor %}
```

## Static Files

All files other then json and yml file will be taken as static files

It is a good pratice to store static files in folder like `assets` or with any name and inside that we can create sub directories like `images`, `pdfs` , etc. to organize them.

We can also give front matter to static files from `_config.yml` file. for example : giving `image: true` property for files inside `assets/images`.

we can loop to call static files for `site.static_files` and they have property like `path`, `basename`, `extname`, etc

```html
{% for file in site.static_files %}
<p>{{ file.path }}</p>
{% endfor %}
```

## Hosting on Github Pages

Pre-requisites:

- Github Account
- Git Installed on Device
- Jekyll Installed on Device

Steps to host jekyll site on Github pages:

1. Create New Repository

2. Create Jekyll Project

3. Update `baseurl` in `_config.yml` file to your `github repository name`

   ```yml
   <!-- Inside _config.yml -->
   baseurl: "repository-name"
   ```

4. Add git to local file to update (Skip if already initialized)

   ```bash
   git init
   ```

5. Creating `gh-pages` branch (by default github pages uses gh-pages branch)

   ```bash
   git checkout -b gh-pages
   ```

6. Make commit (Skip if already commited)

   ```bash
   git add .
   git commit -m "initial commit"
   ```

7. Add Github remote url

   ```bash
   git remote add origin <github-repo-url>
   ```

8. Pushing Changes to github

   ```bash
   git push origin gh-pages
   ```

9. Enabling Github Pages
   - Go to repository setting and enable github pages (if not already enabled)
   - Visit the url of your site

{% endraw %}
